Thermodynamic observables
-------------------------

### Objective

This module defines a set of thermodynamic observables commonly output by
molecular simulation programs.


### Module name and version

The name of this module is `thermodynamics`. The module version is 1.0.0.


### Observables

Thermodynamic observables are stored in the `observables` group for global
properties or in `observables/<group>` for subsystems, similarly to the
`particles` group. The groups have the following contents:

    observables
     \-- <group>
          +-- dimension: Integer[]
          \-- particle_number
          \-- (pressure)
          \-- (temperature)
          \-- (density)
          \-- ...

`dimension`
  : A scalar attribute of `Integer` type that gives the dimension of the space
    embedding the subsystem.

`particle_number`
  : The number of particles in the subsystem stored as `Integer` datatype.

The following H5MD elements are optional, of scalar character, and use the
`Float` datatype.

`pressure`
  : The pressure of the subsystem.

`temperature`
  : The (instantaneous) temperature of the subsystem as inferred from the
    kinetic energy.

`density`
  : The number density of the subsystem stored as `Float` or `Integer`
    datatype.

`potential_energy`
  : The potential energy of the subsystem.

`kinetic_energy`
  : The kinetic energy of the subsystem.

`internal_energy`
  : The internal energy of the subsystem, typically the sum of potential and
    kinetic energy.

`enthalpy`
  : The enthalpy of the subsystem.

The latter 4 quantities are stored as per-particle averages. The corresponding
extensive quantities (scaling linearly with the system size) are obtained by
multiplication with the number of particles. Per-volume averages follow by
multiplication with the number density if present.
